Reversible coercions (#15693)
coq/coq: doc/sphinx/addendum/implicit-coercions.rst

apply the coercion ``f`` to it; the obtained term :g:`f _.._ t` is
then an object of ``D``.

Reverse Coercions
-----------------

> When no coercion can be applied, reverse coercions are looked for.
> That is, when :g:`a : A'` is provided where something of type :g:`A`
> is expected, if there is a coercion :g:`f : A >-> A'` and some :g:`x :
> A` can be infered (typically through :ref:`canonicalstructures` or
> :ref:`typeclasses`) such that :g:`f x = a`, then :g:`a` is replaced by
> :g:`x`. See the :ref:`example below <example-reverse-coercion>`. If no
> :g:`f : A >-> A'` can be found, a coercion :g:`g : A' >-> A''` is
> looked for such that there are a coercion :g:`f : A >-> A''` and some
> :g:`x : A` for which :g:`f x = g a`. Only the coercions declared with
> the :attr:`reverse` attribute can be used as functions :g:`f` above.

Author: I'm pretty sure Jim will do abetter job, but in the meanwhile here my 2 C:
```suggestion
A term is reverse-coerced only if it cannot be coerced (directly) to its expect type.
A coercion is said to be reversible if it is declared with with the :attr:`reverse` attribute.

In order to cast a term :g:`a : A` to type :g:`B` using a reverse coercion we:

1. find a reversible coercion :g:`f : B >-> A`

2. synthesize  some :g:`?x : B` such that :g:`f ?x = a`,
    typically through :ref:`canonicalstructures` or :ref:`typeclasses`
    
3. replace :g:`a` with the value of :g:`?x`

If there is no such reversible coercion :g:`f : B >-> A`, then we:

1. find a midpoint :g:`C` equipped with an incoming reversible coercion :g:`g : B >-> C` and
    a coercion :g:`h : A >-> C` (not necessarily reversible)
 
2. synthesize  some :g:`?x : B` such that :g:`g ?x = h a`

3. we replace :g:`a` with the value of :g:`?x`

If more than one midpoint :g:`C` exists, we try the procedure with all of them in the following order:
a midpoint :g:`C` is tried before a midpoint :g:`D` if these exists a coercion from :g:`C` to :g:`D`.
The intuition is that since coercions forget information, :g:`D` has less information that :g:`C`, and hence
inferring :g:`?x : B` from less information would be harder.

See the :ref:`example below <example-reverse-coercion>`.
```

Author: @proux01 what do you think of this suggestion? Once we mark the PR a ready for review doc-maintainers will be notified, so this suggestion should be accepted/rejected before that.

Reviewer: LGTM, thanks!

apply the coercion ``f`` to it; the obtained term :g:`f _.._ t` is
then an object of ``D``.

Reversible Coercions
--------------------

When a term cannot be coerced (directly) to its expected type, Coq tries to
use a reversible coercion (see the :attr:`reversible` attribute). Intuitively
Coq synthesizes a new term, of the right type, which can be coerced
to the original one. The new term is obtained by reversing the coercion, that

> is guessing its input given the output.

Author: later, I mention type classes and canonical structures as the mechanism of inference

More precisely, in order to cast a term :g:`a : A` to type :g:`B`, Coq
finds a reversible coercion :g:`f : B >-> A`, then synthesizes some :g:`?x : B`
such that :g:`f ?x = a` (typically through :ref:`canonicalstructures` or
:ref:`typeclasses`) and finally replaces :g:`a` with the value of :g:`?x`.

> If Coq doesn't find a reversible coercion :g:`f : B >-> A` is found, then it

Author: ```suggestion
If Coq doesn't find a reversible coercion :g:`f : B >-> A`, then it
```

looks for a coercion class :g:`C` equipped with an incoming reversible coercion
:g:`g : B >-> C` and a coercion :g:`h : A >-> C` (not necessarily reversible),
then synthesizes some :g:`?x : B` such that :g:`g ?x = h a`, and finally

> replaces :g:`a` with the value of :g:`?x`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
replaces :g:`a` with the value of :g:`?x`.
```

apply the coercion ``f`` to it; the obtained term :g:`f _.._ t` is
then an object of ``D``.

Reverse Coercions
-----------------

A term is reverse-coerced only if it cannot be coerced (directly) to its expect type.

> A coercion is said to be reversible if it is declared with with the :attr:`reverse` attribute.

Reviewer 2: Can you reword to begin with "Reverse coercions are/allow/..." - a definition?
The second sentence is not very helpful as written--almost a tautology.

> In order to cast a term :g:`a : A` to type :g:`B` using a reverse coercion we:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to cast a term :g:`a : A` to type :g:`B` using a reverse coercion, Coq:
```

And change to singular verbs for 1-3.

1. find a reversible coercion :g:`f : B >-> A`

2. synthesize  some :g:`?x : B` such that :g:`f ?x = a`,
   typically through :ref:`canonicalstructures` or :ref:`typeclasses`

> 3. replace :g:`a` with the value of :g:`?x`

Reviewer 2: Probably could be bullets.  We don't use numbered lists very much in the doc.  And perhaps it could just be a long sentence--it's not a series of steps the user must follow, e.g. "Coq finds ..., then synthesizes ... and finally replaces ..."

> If there is no such reversible coercion :g:`f : B >-> A`, then we:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If no reversible coercion :g:`f : B >-> A` is found, then Coq:
```

And make the verbs in 1-3 singular

> 1. find a midpoint :g:`C` equipped with an incoming reversible coercion :g:`g : B >-> C` and

Reviewer 2: Probably should state/define what a midpoint is (can be simple, not that formal).  I don't recall seeing that in the PR.

   a coercion :g:`h : A >-> C` (not necessarily reversible)
 
2. synthesize  some :g:`?x : B` such that :g:`g ?x = h a`

> 3. replace :g:`a` with the value of :g:`?x`

Reviewer 2: Perhaps you can word in a way so that it's not necessary to repeat item 3 in both lists?

> If more than one midpoint :g:`C` exists, we try the procedure with all of them in the following order:
> a midpoint :g:`C` is tried before a midpoint :g:`D` if there exists a coercion from :g:`C` to :g:`D`.
> The intuition is that since coercions forget information, :g:`D` has less information that :g:`C`, and hence
> inferring :g:`?x : B` from :g:`h a : D` would be harder.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If there's more than one midpoint, such as :g:`C` and :g:`D`, Coq tries :g:`C` before :g`D` if
there is a coercion from :g:`C` to :g:`D`.
The intuition is that since coercions forget information, :g:`D` has less information that :g:`C`, and hence
inferring :g:`?x : B` from :g:`h a : D` would be harder.
```

If this is on a graph, then the order isn't entirely specified, is it?  I think needs a bit more clarity on that.
Make sure I've not misstated the behavior.

Author: Right, I should mention that this is well defined only if the graph is a semilattice CC @CohenCyril

Declaring Coercions
-------------------------

.. cmd:: Coercion @reference {? : @class >-> @class }
         Coercion @ident_decl @def_body

  The first form declares the construction denoted by :token:`reference` as a coercion between
  the two given classes.  The second form defines :token:`ident_decl`
  just like :cmd:`Definition` :n:`@ident_decl @def_body`
  and then declares :token:`ident_decl` as a coercion between it source and its target.
  Both forms support the :attr:`local` attribute, which makes the coercion local to the current section.

  :n:`{? : @class >-> @class }`
    The source and target classes of the coercion.
    If unspecified, :n:`@reference` must already be a coercion, which
    enables modifying the :attr:`reversible` attribute of :n:`@reference`.
    See the :ref:`example <example-reversible-coercion-attribute>` below.

  .. attr:: reversible{? = {| yes | no } }
     :name: reversible

     Allows the coercion to be used as a reversible coercion.  The default is

>      :n:`no` except for fields specified using :g:`:>` in :cmd:`Record`.

Reviewer 3: "The default is no" is likely to mislead the uninformed reader who may think that `reversible` means `reversible = no` (when in fact it means `reversible = yes`).

Instead of writing "Allows...", I recommend beginning by ``This :term:`attribute` allows`` (and same thing for the `nonuniform` attribute below BTW) because this gives an opportunity to the user who doesn't know how attribute work to click the link and read about it.

Author: done

Declaring Coercions
-------------------------

.. cmd:: Coercion @reference {? : @class >-> @class }
         Coercion @ident_decl @def_body

  The first form declares the construction denoted by :token:`reference` as a coercion between
  the two given classes.  The second form defines :token:`ident_decl`
  just like :cmd:`Definition` :n:`@ident_decl @def_body`
  and then declares :token:`ident_decl` as a coercion between it source and its target.
  Both forms support the :attr:`local` attribute, which makes the coercion local to the current section.

  :n:`{? : @class >-> @class }`
    The source and target classes of the coercion.
    If unspecified, :n:`@reference` must already be a coercion, which
    enables modifying the :attr:`reversible` attribute of :n:`@reference`.
    See the :ref:`example <example-reversible-coercion-attribute>` below.

  .. attr:: reversible{? = {| yes | no } }
     :name: reversible

>      This `term`:attribute allows the coercion to be used as a reversible

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     This :term:`attribute` allows the coercion to be used as a reversible
```

Reviewer 4: It would also be nice to link to the reversible coercions section here. When searching for reversible, this attribute is the first result.

>      This :term:`attribute` allows the coercion to be used as a reversible

Reviewer 3: Similarly, as suggested by Ali, it would be good to link from here and from the example to the section describing what reversible coercions are.

-------------------------

.. cmd:: Coercion @reference : @class >-> @class
         Coercion @ident_decl @def_body
         Coercion @qualid

  The first form declares the construction denoted by :token:`reference` as a coercion between
  the two given classes.  The second form defines :token:`ident_decl`
  just like :cmd:`Definition` :n:`@ident_decl @def_body`
  and then declares :token:`ident_decl` as a coercion between it source and its target.
  Both forms support the :attr:`local` attribute, which makes the coercion local to the current section.

>   The third form enables to modify the :attr:`reversible` attribute of
>   the already declared coercion :token:`qualid`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The third form enables modifying the :attr:`reversible` attribute of
  the already declared coercion :token:`qualid`.
```

I get the impression that French may always use the infinitive where English uses the gerund.  I see this kind of typo often :-(.

-------------------------

.. cmd:: Coercion @reference : @class >-> @class
         Coercion @ident {? {? @univ_decl } @def_body }

  The first form declares the construction denoted by :token:`reference` as a coercion between
  the two given classes.  The second form defines :token:`ident`
  just like :cmd:`Definition` :n:`@ident {? @univ_decl } @def_body`
  and then declares :token:`ident` as a coercion between it source and its target.
  Both forms support the :attr:`local` attribute, which makes the coercion local to the current section.

  :n:`{? {? @univ_decl } @def_body }`
    If unspecified, :n:`@ident` must already be a coercion.
    This enables to modify the :attr:`reverse` attribute of :n:`@ident`.

>     See the :ref:`example below <example-reverse-coercion-attribute>`.

Reviewer: Thanks, I kept m`modifying`  as the syntax can be used to either set or unset the `reversible` attribute.
I withdrawn the `later on` as it modifies the attribute immediately.

  and then declares :token:`ident` as a coercion between it source and its target.
  Both forms support the :attr:`local` attribute, which makes the coercion local to the current section.

  :n:`{? : @class >-> @class }`
    The source and target classes of the coercion.
    If unspecified, :n:`@ident` must already be a coercion, which
    enables modifying the :attr:`reversible` attribute of :n:`@ident`.

>     See the :ref:`example <example-reversible-coercion-attribute>` below.

Reviewer 2: As I mention elsewhere, this doesn't match the mlg file.

    Check (b 0).
    Unset Printing Coercions.

.. _example-reversible-coercion:

.. example:: Reverse coercions

  Notice the :n:`:>` on `ssort`.
  
  .. coqtop:: in

    Structure S := {
      ssort :> Type;
      sstuff : ssort;
    }.
    Definition test (s : S) := sstuff s.
    Canonical Structure S_nat := {| ssort := nat; sstuff := 0; |}.

  .. coqtop:: all

    Check test (nat : Type).

.. _example-reversible-coercion-attribute:

.. example:: Reverse coercions using the :attr:`reversible` attribute

  Notice there is no `:>` on `ssort'` and the added :cmd:`Coercion` compared

>   to the previous example

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  to the previous example.
```

    Check (b 0).
    Unset Printing Coercions.

.. _example-reverse-coercion:

> .. example:: Reverse coercions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. example:: Reverse coercions
```

>   .. coqtop:: in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Notice the :n:`:>` on `ssort`.
```

    Structure S := {
      ssort :> Type;
      sstuff : ssort;
    }.
    Definition test (s : S) := sstuff s.
    Canonical Structure S_nat := {| ssort := nat; sstuff := 0; |}.

  .. coqtop:: all

    Check test (nat : Type).

.. _example-reverse-coercion-attribute:

> .. example:: Reverse coercions (reverse attribute).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. example:: Reverse coercions using the :attr:`reverse` attribute
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notice there is no `:>` on `ssort'` and the added :cmd:`Coercion` compared to the previous example
```

Would be so nice if we could boldface parts of examples.  You can put comments in `.. coqtop::` but only between Coq sentences.

  .. coqtop:: in

    Structure S' := {
      ssort' : Type;
      sstuff' : ssort';
    }.
    Coercion ssort' : S' >-> Sortclass.
    Definition test' (s : S') := sstuff' s.
    Canonical Structure S_nat' := {| ssort' := nat; sstuff' := 0; |}.

>   This is the same as the previous example, except that, by default,
>   the reverse attribute in unset:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Since there's no `:>` on the definition of `ssort'`, the :attr:`reverse` attribute is not set:
```

Don't need to say "no :>" in two places, take your pick.

    Check (b 0).
    Unset Printing Coercions.

.. _example-reversible-coercion:

> .. example:: Reverse coercions

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.. example:: Reversible coercions
```

  Notice the :n:`:>` on `ssort`.

  .. coqtop:: in

    Structure S := {
      ssort :> Type;
      sstuff : ssort;
    }.
    Definition test (s : S) := sstuff s.
    Canonical Structure S_nat := {| ssort := nat; sstuff := 0; |}.

  .. coqtop:: all

    Check test (nat : Type).

.. _example-reversible-coercion-attribute:

> .. example:: Reverse coercions using the :attr:`reversible` attribute

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.. example:: Reversible coercions using the :attr:`reversible` attribute
```
